1 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXPERT REPORT 
 
 
Name: 
 
Date of Birth: 
 
 
This Best Doctors Report Summary does not include all information regarding your assessment and options.  
You should not consider this summary to be all-inclusive, nor should you consider reading this summary to be 
a substitute for reading the entire Expert report(s).  Neither this Best Doctors Report Summary nor the Expert 
report(s) should be considered, or used as, a substitute for medical advice, diagnosis or treatment from your 
treating physician or other medical provider.  
 
Best Doctors Report Summary 
This Best Doctors’ Report Summary highlights and clarifies the key points of your Expert report(s).   
 
You can use this as an aid when you read the report(s) and in the future when you review and 
discuss the report(s) with your treating physician(s). We are always available to you and your treating 
team should there be any additional questions or concerns.   
 
Dr. Salner has reviewed your case and recommends that you and your treating physician(s) review 
and consider the following assessment and options:  
 
With regards to your diagnosis and workup: 
 Dr. Salner agrees that you have a squamous cell carcinoma of the left tonsil that only involves 
the tonsil and not the lymph nodes 
 The cancer was caught early and is highly curable (with appropriate treatment there is a good 
chance it will go away permanently) 
 Dr. Salner recommends a visit with a dentist prior to starting radiation to make sure that there 
are no dental problems that need fixing before you start treatment 
 
With regards to your management options: 
 Since the cancer was present at the “margin” (edge) of the area where the surgeon cut, there 
is a chance there are still cancer cells present in the body and therefore additional treatment 
with radiation is recommended to the tonsil area  
 Dr. Salner recommends radiation to the tonsil area (tonsillar fossa) and the upper neck area 
right around the tonsil with a total dose of 60 Gy 
 He also recommends that you see a medical oncologist to discuss whether chemotherapy is 
recommended in addition to radiation (chemotherapy and radiation are often given together in 
these situations) 
 Dr. Salner has discussed the possible side effects of radiation in his report; careful planning by 
the radiation oncologist will help minimize these effects by optimizing the radiation to the area 
it is needed and minimizing radiation to the surrounding healthy tissue 
 He does not see any clear advantage to proton therapy in your case right now, though if the 
cancer had been more advanced or were to come back after treatment these would be 
situations where there may be more benefit to proton therapy 
 During therapy, a dietician and a speech therapist may be helpful to optimize nutrition therapy 
as well as function of the neck and pharynx (swallowing area) 
 
 
 
 
1 Boston Place, 32nd Floor | Boston, MA 02108 | Tel. 617.426.3666 | Fax. 617.426.8595 | www.bestdoctors.com 
Best Doctors® and the star-in-cross logo are registered trademarks of Best Doctors, Inc. in the United States and in other countries. 
Regarding follow-up and prognosis: 
 Regular follow-up with your physicians is recommended as is a PET scan about 4-6 months 
after treatment to make sure there is no evidence of residual or additional cancer 
 Physical activity and a healthy diet can also help optimize your overall health 
1 
 
 
 
Name:
 
Date of Birth: 
 
 
Case Overview: 
Mr. 
 is a 59-year old gentleman with recently diagnosed squamous cell carcinoma of the left 
tonsil s/p tonsillectomy and left neck dissection and is planning to start radiation therapy who seeks 
consultation regarding recommendations for further management, specifically whether Proton beam 
therapy is recommended. 
 
History of Present Illness: 
Mr. 
 is a 59-year old gentleman who was in good health until late 2017, when he began to suffer 
from “various throat infections.”  He noticed a lump in his throat in 12/2017 and saw his GP, who 
referred him to an ENT specialist.  MRI of the neck on 12/18/2017 demonstrated a large focal mass 
lesion centered on the left palatine tonsil (2.6 X 3cm) with low T1 signal and avid post-contrast 
enhancement, concerning for a malignancy.  The right tonsil was bulky but not enlarged to the extent of 
the left tonsil.  There were bilateral prominent cervical lymph nodes involving levels 2 and 3, measuring 
up to 12mm in short axis in the right level II region.  MRI of the skull base showed the left tonsillar mass 
as above along with small volume bilateral cervical adenopathy. 
 
CT of the chest on 1/3/2018 showed tiny non-specific pulmonary nodules, unlikely to represent 
metastatic disease.  He then underwent a bilateral tonsillectomy on 1/3/2018 and pathology showed 
squamous cell carcinoma of the left tonsil, moderately differentiated, 18mm thick and present to the 
dissected base of the tonsil.  Review at another institution confirmed the diagnosis and measured the 
tumor at least 21mm X 19mm and present at the deep resection margin.  Supplementary testing was 
strongly positive for p16. 
 
PET/CT on 1/25/2018 showed increased uptake in the left tonsillar bed (SUBmax 7.8) and an FDG-avid 
left cervical lymph node (SUVmax 3.5) with several mildly avid right-sided level 2 lymph nodes (SUVmax 
3.6) and mild uptake related to the right tonsil (possibly within normal limits).  There was also an FDG 
avid nodule close to the upper pole of the right lobe of the thyroid (SUVmax 4.9).  He underwent a neck 
dissection on 2/7/2018.  Pathology from the left tonsil fossa and anterior pillar showed severe dysplasia.  
17 nodes were removed during the neck dissection (levels 3, 4, 2, and 2a) and none showed evidence of 
metastatic malignancy. 
 
2 
 
Though no further clinical notes were provided, he states that his doctors discussed radiation therapy.  
However, he is concerned about the treatment and the effects it will have on him.  Additionally, his wife 
was recently diagnosed with triple negative breast cancer and is about to start neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy, and they have two young children at home, so he does not want to be sick at the same 
time of his wife because they need to have someone able to take care of the children.  He is interested 
in Proton beam therapy instead of conventional IMRT radiation, but it is not offered in the UK.  He states 
that he is able to travel if this is the best treatment for him. 
 
As of the most recent update, he stated that “his doctors explained that he does not meet the criteria 
for Proton Beam therapy due to his type of cancer.”  He is therefore scheduled to start radiation therapy 
fairly soon – 60 Gy Monday-Friday for 6 weeks. 
 
Review of Systems: 
• 
Post-operative pain after neck dissection 
• 
Fatigue 
 
Past Medical History: 
Testicular cancer 25 years prior, s/p surgery and radiation 
 
Past Surgical History: 
ENT surgeries as above 
 
Current Medications: 
“Pain medication” 
 
Allergies: 
NKDA 
 
Family History: 
Maternal grandfather with cancer of unknown type 
No other reported family history of malignancy 
Mother with dementia and glaucoma 
Father with aneurysm 
 
Social History: 
He is married and has 2 children 
Works as a lecturer 
Non-smoker 
Occasionally drinks alcohol 
 
Physical Examination: 
Height: 6’1” 
Weight: 220 pounds 
BMI: 29.02 
 
Treating Physician's Assessment and Plan: 
Summary:  
3 
 
Mr. 
 is a 59-year old gentleman who presented with throat infections and a neck mass and was 
diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma of the left tonsil.  He is s/p tonsillectomy and left neck 
dissection with no evidence of nodal metastases or distant metastatic disease.  He is planning to start 
radiation therapy but is concerned about the side effects, particularly since his wife was recently 
diagnosed with breast cancer and they have two small children and need one of them to be healthy 
enough to be the caretaker.  He has asked his providers about Proton beam therapy but has been told 
that it is not available in the UK and is not recommended for his particular diagnosis.  He seeks 
consultation regarding recommendations for further management, specifically whether Proton beam 
therapy is recommended. 
• 
Key testing: MRI neck/skull base, PET/CT scan, pathology from tonsillectomy and neck dissection 
• 
Key treatments to date: Tonsillectomy and neck dissection 
• 
Planned evaluation and treatment: Radiation therapy (IMRT) 
 
Questions and Expert Assessment: 
Question 1. What is your overall assessment of the member’s condition (diagnosis and staging) based 
on the information provided for review? 
 
The member appears to have a P16+ invasive moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the 
left tonsil with negative cervical nodes by neck dissection pT2pN0M0 Stage II.  This is an early and highly 
curable scenario. 
 
Question 2. What additional diagnostic testing do you recommend, if any? 
 
He will require a pre-irradiation dental visit and appropriate radiographs to ensure that restorable teeth 
are repaired and non-restorable teeth are extracted. 
 
Question 3. What treatment options exist (including the current treatment plan for IMRT)? What are 
the relative advantages and disadvantages of each option? How would you recommend proceeding in 
this case? He specifically wonders if you recommend Proton beam therapy and why or why not.  
Please compare and contrast IMRT and Proton beam therapy in terms of efficacy and side effect 
profile for tonsillar cancer if possible. 
 
Options include: 
1-no further therapy 
2-IMRT radiation therapy +/- chemotherapy 
3-proton therapy +/- chemotherapy 
 
I would be reluctant to recommend no further therapy.  The initial margin of the left tonsillectomy was 
involved, and even though the subsequent fossa biopsy/tonsillar pillar biopsy were negative, one has to 
think that there is a high risk of residual microscopic disease in the tumor bed.  In addition, the surgical 
approach was not a radical tonsillectomy either transoral or with a mandibular split aimed at achieving 
negative margins.  Therefore, further definitive therapy is needed to achieve a high likelihood of local 
control. On the other hand, neck irradiation is less important with pN0 neck findings.  
 
 I would therefore favor left oropharynx radiation to the tonsillar fossa and contiguous upper neck to a 
dose of 60 Gy.  Many investigators believe that a positive margin is a high risk feature that suggests that 
concomitant chemotherapy adds to ultimate local control.  I would certainly obtain a medical oncology 
consultation to determine whether concomitant weekly chemotherapy is warranted.  The use of 
4 
 
customized head and neck immobilization, CT based simulation and treatment planning, IMRT 
treatment planning, and daily image guidance all help to ensure precision and accuracy.  Avoiding the 
contralateral pharynx and neck and salivary gland will help to reduce acute and late effects.  Acute 
effects include fatigue, erythema, hair loss in treated area, taste alteration, mucositis and xerostomia.  
Ipsilateral IMRT will help to reduce the area of soreness and the extent of dryness and hopefully 
facilitate maintenance of nutrition and hydration during therapy without the need for a feeding tube.  
Late effects include fibrosis, pharyngeal dysfunction, xerostomia, and osteoradionecrosis risk.  IMRT 
helps to reduce all of these by carefully positioning the high dose area and minimizing dose to 
surrounding tissue. 
 
Proton therapy has similar biologic effects as photon therapy with IMRT but has the geographic 
advantage of less radiation dose in entry and exit transit tissues outside the target volume.  In this case, 
where doses can be delivered successfully to a moderate dose with IMRT, I believe there is relatively 
little if any advantage to the use of protons.  For head and neck cancers that are locally advanced, that 
are of subtypes with less radiation sensitivity (ie selected salivary cancers), or that are recurrent, there 
would clearly be a potential advantageous role for protons.  I don’t see a clear advantage in this setting. 
 
Question 4. How would you recommend following this patient?  
 
He will need regular visits with his treating physicians, a followup PET scan some 4-6 months post 
therapy to ensure that there is no further PET avid disease foci, and other imaging as needed based on 
signs, symptoms and exam findings. 
 
Question 5. If not addressed by the questions above, please provide any further recommendations 
that you believe will aid in understanding this patient’s findings or in guiding future therapeutic 
decisions. 
 
Physical activity may help to reduce recurrence risk.  Exercising a minimum of 150 minutes per week, 
with exercise a minimum of 5 days per week, may help to reduce cancer recurrence risk.  During and 
after the radiation therapy, the involvement of a dietician and physician and speech therapist will help 
to optimize nutrition during therapy, and function of his neck, left arm, and pharynx.  He will require 
greater dental surveillance.  Diets lower i9n saturated fat and carbohydrates, and higher in vegetables 
and fruits, and lower in alcohol, may be helpful. 
 
Question 6. Please provide clinical references that support your assessment/recommendations and 
that may be helpful to the treating physician. 
 
1. Charbonneau N, Gélinas M, del Vecchio P, et al. Primary radiotherapy for tonsillar carcinoma: a 
good alternative to a surgical approach. J Otolaryngol 2006; 35:227. 
2. Mendenhall WM, Morris CG, Amdur RJ, et al. Definitive radiotherapy for tonsillar squamous cell 
carcinoma. Am J Clin Oncol 2006; 29:290. 
3. Civantos F, Wenig BL. Transhyoid resection of tongue base and tonsil tumors. Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 1994; 111:59. 
4. Agrawal A, Wenig BL. Resection of cancer of the tongue base and tonsil via the transhyoid 
approach. Laryngoscope 2000; 110:1802. 
5. Moore EJ, Olsen KD, Kasperbauer JL. Transoral robotic surgery for oropharyngeal squamous cell 
carcinoma: a prospective study of feasibility and functional outcomes. Laryngoscope 2009; 
119:2156. 
5 
 
6. Weinstein GS, O'Malley BW Jr, Snyder W, et al. Transoral robotic surgery: radical tonsillectomy. 
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2007; 133:1220. 
7. Weinstein GS, Quon H, Newman HJ, et al. Transoral robotic surgery alone for oropharyngeal 
cancer: an analysis of local control. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2012; 138:628. 
8. Bernier J, Cooper JS, Pajak TF, et al. Defining risk levels in locally advanced head and neck 
cancers: a comparative analysis of concurrent postoperative radiation plus chemotherapy trials 
of the EORTC (#22931) and RTOG (# 9501). Head Neck 2005; 27:843. 
9. National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). NCCN Clinical practice guidelines in oncology. 
http://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/f_guidelines.asp (Accessed on February 27, 
2016). 
 
In summary, the patient presents with a left tonsil P16+ squamous cell cancer, who underwent 
tonsillectomy with involved margin, and had a neck dissection with all negative nodes.  His risk of 
residual microscopic disease is high, and I would recommend a course of postoperative IMRT radiation 
therapy.  I would recommend consideration of concomitant weekly chemotherapy given the fact that 
margin involvement is a high risk feature. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Andrew L. Salner, MD FACR 
Director, Helen & Harry Gray Cancer Center 
Past Chair, Department of Radiation Oncology 
Clinical Professor, University of Connecticut School of Medicine 
 
 
 
 
 
Consulted Physician 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Andrew L.  Salner  
 
 
Radiation Oncology 
 
 
 
 
Hartford Hospital 
 
 
Helen and Harry Gray Cancer Center, Hartford Radiation Oncology Associates 
 
 
85 Retreat Ave 
 
 
 
 
 
Hartford, CT 06102 
 
 
US 
 
 
860-972-2803 
 
 
 
 
 
Profile 
 
 
 
Fellowship: 
Radiation Therapy Research, Joint Center for Radiation Therapy - 1981 
Intern: 
Hartford Hospital - 1977 
Medical School: 
Brown University School of Medicine - 1976 
Residency: 
Hartford Hospital - 1978 
 
 
 
 
 
Titles 
 
 
 
Clinical Professor of Radiology, University of Connecticut School of Medicine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary 
 
 
 
Specialty 
Sub Specialty 
Radiation Oncology 
General Radiation Oncology 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Notes: Best Doctors, Inc. has used its best efforts in assembling materials for this report but does not warrant that the information contained herein is 
complete or accurate, and does not assume, and hereby disclaims, any liability to any person for any loss or damage caused by errors or omissions 
herein whether such errors of omissions result from negligence, accident or any other cause.  Best Doctors is not responsible for the patient-physician 
relationship. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Best Doctors and the star-in-cross logo are registered marks of Best Doctors, Inc. in the United States and other countries. 
 
 
 
